Based on my student number my exam project is nr. 11 - Symmetric rank-1 update of a size-*n* symmetric egenvalue problem.

**Describtion of project**

This project aimed to solve a symmetric rank-1 update of a size-n symmetric eigenvalue problem. The objective was to find the eigenvalues of a matrix A which takes the form A = D + uu^T using a time complexity of O(n^2) operations. The main part of the solution is implemented in the RankOneUpdate.cs which takes the diagonal matrix D of size nxn and a vector u of size n and computes the eigenvalues of A using the secular equation (Eq. 4.23) for non-zero sigma values. The secular equation derived from the eigenvalue equation, enables us to find the roots, which represent the updated eigenvalues of the matrix. The implemented function takes advantage of the fact that the roots of the secular equation are bounded by the eigenvalues of the diagonal matrix D, which simplifies the root-finding process, provided good initial guesses for the iterative method is given. The method chosen for computing the roots is the Newton method with numerical Jacobian and back-tracking linesearch from homework 8. A small modification form the implementation in homework 8 was needed, in which a maximum number of steps was needed to be introduced as for the cases where the Newton method could not converge. The initial guesses for the Newton method were chosen to be the eigenvalues of the diagonal matrix D, which was based on the fact that the roots of the secular equation (which are the updated eigenvalues of the matrix) are bounded by these eigenvalues. By using the eigenvalues of D as the initial guess, the Newton method is able to be started close to the actual roots of the secular equation.

In the main.cs file when performance was tested sometimes the time for convergence could become quite long for the larger matrices due to the random nature of the genrated matrix. Therefore a timelimit was implemented in which the algorithm was started over again with a new matrix, in case of overstepping. Ideally the time complexicity for a single nxn matrix had been taken as an average over a couple of calculations, however, since the computation already takes a couple of seconds I have opted against this. The result may be that in the plotting large discrepensies can be observed between matrices of similar size. Otherwise the main.cs contains the part where the implementation is tested with cases for σ <= 0 and > 0, as well as the performance test where a for loop is constructed and the rank-1 update is applied to continously growing matrices and plotted and fitted to a O(n^2) time complexicity.


**Evaluation of project**

I would evaluate my project to a 9/10 since the implementation succeds in finding the roots of the secular equationa and thereby the eigenvalues of the matrix A. However, further implementations could have been made to increase the numerical stability of the algorithm. This could have involved exploring different initial guess strategies, or implement better handle situations where Newton's method struggles to converge. Investigation of another root finding method could perhaps also have been investigated.
